---
title: Annual Appeal
translationID: 20231108-appeal
lang: en
---
  
Dear Members and Attenders, 

This letter is addressed to those who find a spiritual home in our meeting. We are encouraging you to consider making a donation to help support the running of the meeting. We have begun to find our energy again after the last few difficult years and we are planning great things.

We have a few thousand dollars in recurring expenses which include:

* Fulfilling our annual quota for Canadian Yearly Meeting to support their work. 
* Donating to Canadian Friends Service Committee. 
* We need to pay rent for the room used for Meeting for Worship on Sunday but we are fortunate to have a space at MORSL in McGill University free to hold Midweek Meeting for Worship. 
* Purchasing pamphlets and books for Montreal Meeting · 
* Donations to causes including Communitas, which bridges the gap between prison and the community by bringing currently or formerly incarcerated individuals together with everyday citizens. 

Some of us have preferred to donate on a monthly basis or on occasion throughout 2023, and others wait to this time of year to make a contribution based on year-end needs. Please donate as you feel you can.

People use different ways of calculating their annual donations. One percent of your income could be a guideline.  Or, based on the Meeting’s needs, note that we have paid just over $100 per week for all our expenses in 2023. Counting on 10 people who can pay, that would be $10 per week or $500 per year. Please take this into consideration at this time when considering a donation for 2023. But all donations are welcome, large or small, as your means provide.

Our expenditure in 2023 has been $5309.

To date our 2023 donations total $2185.       

This leaves a shortfall of **$3124**.

* We encourage donations through our [CanadaHelps page](/donate) 
* However, we do have a donations box on the table at Meeting for Worship.  
* And cheques can be made payable to “Religious Society of Friends, Montreal Monthly Meeting” mailed to our treasurer Claire Adamson at 1090 Ave Greene, Westmount, QC H3Z 1Z9.  

Receipts for tax purposes will be issued for any donations over $10. 

Claire Adamson, Treasurer, Montreal Monthly Meeting. 

Janette Fraser Co-clerk Montreal Monthly Meeting
